TPAC began in 2000. John Sewell is, sort of,
the coordinator of it and was bringing people
together, not because of the Pussy Palace.
That was one of many egregious and awful
things that police had been doing. I had been a
member of another group called the Committee to
Stop Targeted Policing in the late 90s, and we
were organizing around the targeting of homeless
people in parks. It was an initiative that they
called “Community Action Policing.” It involved
cops in little gangs, frankly, of four or five,
kind of, wandering... Going through parks in
targeted neighbourhoods, which are always the same
neighbourhoods — Black, low-income, racialized
neighbourhoods — targeting people. “Why are you
here? What are you doing?” That was happening in
the late 90s. Their budget continued to grow and
to grow and to grow. And when crime goes down,
they invent things for themselves to do. Hence the
“Community Action Policing,” and on, and on. So,
there was lots going on, and this was just yet
more of. I think [Julian] Fantino was the chief
then. I mean, a horrible, horrible person and
police chief, and he had a history, as you know,
of targeting gay men in London, Ontario back in
the day. And then this happens. That can’t be
unrelated, the fact that cops felt emboldened to
go in and raid this lesbian and trans bathhouse,
you know, once he became chief. But for
most of us who had been around and been
involved in politics in Toronto for any
length of time, this was not surprising,
but it was enraging. Don’t forget, this
is the time of Mike Harris and horrible,
horrible oppression of poor people and homeless
people. And the police were increasingly,
increasingly used as an arm of the state. I mean,
they always have been. Again, this is not news
to Indigenous people, certainly, not news to most
Black folks in the city, but for a lot of people,
it was a growing realization and just a cementing
of the fact that the police are… Their purpose
was to uphold the state and to act, you know,
absolutely unaccountably without any checks and
balances. And when you do that to people,
you’re going to get more uprising. If you
marginalize folks so that they have nothing
left to lose, then they will act like they
have nothing left to lose. Often that gets turned
in towards themselves and their own communities,
but it will also get aimed outwards, and what do
you need then? You need a heavier-handed police
force to keep that under control, and it just...
I think, though, for people, this was shocking
in that it was so egregious. “Why? Why would you
do that?” Right, like, it was because they could.